<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-23" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
			<p>Down in the lower castle, the Archbishop was accustomed, when he undressed, to have with him neither priest nor page, but only, when he desired to converse of public matters⁠—as now he did⁠—his gentleman, Lascelles. He knelt above his kneeling-stool of black wood; he was telling his beads before a great crucifix with an ivory Son of God upon it. His chamber had bare white walls, his bed no curtains, and all the other furnishing of the room was a great black lectern whereto there was chained a huge Book of the Holy Writ that had his Preface. The tears were in his eyes as he muttered his prayers; he glanced upwards at the face of his Saviour, who looked down with a pallid, uncoloured face of ivory, the features shewing a great agony so that the mouth was opened. It was said that this image, that came from Italy, had had a face serene, before the Queen Katharine of Aragon had been put away. Then it had cried out once, and so remained ever lachrymose and in agony.</p>
			<p>“God help me, I cannot well pray,” the Archbishop said. “The peril that we have been in stays with me still.”</p>
			<p>“Why, thank God that we are come out of it very well,” Lascelles said. “You may pray and then sleep more calm than ever you have done this sennight.”</p>
			<p>He leant back against the reading-pulpit, and had his arm across the Bible as if it had been the shoulder of a friend.</p>
			<p>“Why,” the Archbishop said, “this is the worst day ever I have been through since Cromwell fell.”</p>
			<p>“Please it your Grace,” his confidant said, “it shall yet turn out the best.”</p>
			<p>The Archbishop faced round upon his knees; he had taken off the jewel from before his breast, and, with his chain of Chaplain of the George, it dangled across the corner of the fald-stool. His coat was unbuttoned at the neck, his robe open, and it was manifest that his sleeves of lawn were but sleeves, for in the opening was visible, harsh and grey, the shirt of hair that night and day he wore.</p>
			<p>“I am weary of this talk of the world,” he said. “Pray you begone and leave me to my prayers.”</p>
			<p>“Please it your Grace to let me stay and hearten you,” Lascelles said, and he was aware that the Archbishop was afraid to be alone with the white Christ. “All your other gentry are in bed. I shall watch your sleep, to wake you if you cry out.”</p>
			<p>And in his fear of Cromwell’s ghost that came to him in his dreams, the Archbishop sighed⁠—</p>
			<p>“Why stay, but speak not. Y’are over bold.”</p>
			<p>He turned again to the wall; his beads clicked; he sighed and remained still for a long time, a black shadow, huddled together in a black gown, sighing before the white and lamenting image that hung above him.</p>
			<p>“God help me,” he said at last. “Tell me why you say this is <i xml:lang="la">dies felix</i>?”</p>
			<p>Lascelles, who smiled forever and without mirth, said⁠—</p>
			<p>“For two things: firstly, because this letter and its sending are put off. And secondly, because the Queen is⁠—patently and to all people⁠—proved lewd.”</p>
			<p>The Archbishop swung his head round upon his shoulders.</p>
			<p>“You dare not say it!” he said.</p>
			<p>“Why, the late Queen Katharine from Aragon was accounted a model of piety, yet all men know she was over fond with her confessor,” Lascelles smiled.</p>
			<p>“It is an approved lie and slander,” the Archbishop said.</p>
			<p>“It served mightily well in pulling down that Katharine,” his confidant answered.</p>
			<p>“One day”⁠—the Archbishop shivered within his robes⁠—“the account and retribution for these lies shall be to be paid. For well we know, you, I, and all of us, that these be falsities and cozenings.”</p>
			<p>“Marry,” Lascelles said, “of this Queen it is now sufficiently proved true.”</p>
			<p>The Archbishop made as if he washed his hands.</p>
			<p>“Why,” Lascelles said, “what man shall believe it was by chance and accident that she met her cousin on these moors? She is not a compass that pointeth, of miraculous power, true North.”</p>
			<p>“No good man shall believe what you do say,” the Archbishop cried out.</p>
			<p>“But a multitude of indifferent will,” Lascelles answered.</p>
			<p>“God help me,” the Archbishop said, “what a devil you are that thus hold out and hold out forever hopes.”</p>
			<p>“Why,” Lascelles said, “I think you were well helped that day that I came into your service. It was the Great Privy Seal that bade me serve you and commended me.”</p>
			<p>The Archbishop shivered at that name.</p>
			<p>“What an end had Thomas Cromwell!” he said.</p>
			<p>“Why, such an end shall not be yours whilst this King lives, so well he loves you,” Lascelles answered.</p>
			<p>The Archbishop stood upon his feet; he raised his hands above his head.</p>
			<p>“Begone! Begone!” he cried. “I will not be of your evil schemes.”</p>
			<p>“Your Grace shall not,” Lascelles said very softly, “if they miscarry. But when it is proven to the hilt that this Queen is a very lewd woman⁠—and proven it shall be⁠—your Grace may carry an accusation to the King⁠—”</p>
			<p>Cranmer said⁠—</p>
			<p>“Never! never! Shall I come between the lion and his food?”</p>
			<p>“It were better if your Grace would carry the accusation,” Lascelles uttered nonchalantly, “for the King will better hearken to you than to any other. But another man will do it too.”</p>
			<p>“I will not be of this plotting,” the Archbishop cried out. “It is a very wicked thing!” He looked round at the white Christ that, upon the dark cross, bent anguished brows upon him. “Give me strength,” he said.</p>
			<p>“Why, your Grace shall not be of it,” Lascelles answered, “until it is proven in the eyes of your Grace⁠—ay, and in the eyes of some of the Papist Lords⁠—as, for instance, her very uncle⁠—that this Queen was evil in her life before the King took her, and that she hath acted very suspicious in the aftertime.”</p>
			<p>“You shall not prove it to the Papist Lords,” Cranmer said. “It is a folly.”</p>
			<p>He added vehemently⁠—</p>
			<p>“It is a wicked plot. It is a folly too. I will not be of it.”</p>
			<p>“This is a very fortunate day,” Lascelles said. “I think it is proven to all discerning men that that letter to him of Rome shall never be sent.”</p>
			<p>“Why, it is as plain as the truths of the Six Articles,” Cranmer remonstrated, “that it shall be sent tomorrow or the next day. Get you gone! This King hath but the will of the Queen to guide him, and all her will turns upon that letter. Get you gone!”</p>
			<p>“Please it your Grace,” the spy said, “it is very manifest that with the Queen so it is. But with the King it is otherwise. He will pleasure the Queen if he may. But⁠—mark me well⁠—for this is a subtle matter⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I will not mark you,” the Archbishop said. “Get you gone and find another master. I will not hear you. This is the very end.”</p>
			<p>Lascelles moved his arm from the Bible. He bent his form to a bow⁠—he moved till his hand was on the latch of the door.</p>
			<p>“Why, continue,” the Archbishop said. “If you have awakened my fears, you shall slake them if you can⁠—for this night I shall not sleep.”</p>
			<p>And so, very lengthily, Lascelles unfolded his view of the King’s nature. For, said he, if this alliance with the Pope should come, it must be an alliance with the Pope and the Emperor Charles. For the King of France was an atheist, as all men knew. And an alliance with the Pope and the Emperor must be an alliance against France. But the King o’ Scots was the closest ally that Francis had, and never should the King dare to wage war upon Francis till the King o’ Scots was placated or wooed by treachery to be a prisoner, as the King would have made him if James had come into England to the meeting. Well would the King, to save his soul, placate and cosset his wife. But that he never dare do whilst James was potent at his back.</p>
			<p>And again, Lascelles said, well knew the Archbishop that the Duke of Norfolk and his following were the ancient friends of France. If the Queen should force the King to this Imperial League, it must turn Norfolk and the Bishop of Winchester forever to her bitter foes in that land. And along with them all the Protestant nobles and all the Papists too that had lands of the Church.</p>
			<p>The Archbishop had been marking his words very eagerly. But suddenly he cried out⁠—</p>
			<p>“But the King! The King! What shall it boot if all these be against her so the King be but for her?”</p>
			<p>“Why,” Lascelles said, “this King is not a very stable man. Still, man he is, a man very jealous and afraid of fleers and flouts. If we can show him⁠—I do accede to it that after what he hath done tonight it shall not be easy, but we may accomplish it⁠—if before this letter is sent we may show him that all his land cries out at him and mocks him with a great laughter because of his wife’s evil ways⁠—why then, though in his heart he may believe her as innocent as you or I do now, it shall not be long before he shall put her away from him. Maybe he shall send her to the block.”</p>
			<p>“God help me,” Cranmer said. “What a hellish scheme is this.”</p>
			<p>He pondered for a while, standing upright and frailly thrusting his hand into his bosom.</p>
			<p>“You shall never get the King so to believe,” he said; “this is an idle invention. I will none of it.”</p>
			<p>“Why, it may be done, I do believe,” Lascelles said, “and greatly it shall help us.”</p>
			<p>“No, I will none of it,” the Archbishop said. “It is a foul scheme. Besides, you must have many witnesses.”</p>
			<p>“I have some already,” Lascelles said, “and when we come to London Town I shall have many more. It was not for nothing that the Great Privy Seal commended me.”</p>
			<p>“But to make the King,” Cranmer uttered, as if he were aghast and amazed, “to make the King⁠—this King who knoweth that his wife hath done no wrong⁠—who knoweth it so well as tonight he hath proven⁠—to make <em>him</em>, him, to put her away⁠ ⁠… why, the tiger is not so fell, nor the Egyptian worm preyeth not on its kind. This is an imagination so horrible⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Please it your Grace,” Lascelles said softly, “what beast or brute hath your Grace ever seen to betray its kind as man will betray brother, son, father, or consort?”</p>
			<p>The Archbishop raised his hands above his head.</p>
			<p>“What lesser bull of the herd, or lesser ram, ever so played traitor to his leader as Brutus played to Caesar Julius? And these be times less noble.”</p>
			<hr style="width: 65%;"/>
			<p>
				<span class="pagenum">
					<a id="page559">559</a>
				</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
