<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-22" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3>II</h3>
			<p>The King thought fit to change his mood, so that it was with uplifted brows and a quizzing smile at the corners of his mouth that for a minute he greeted these frightened lords in the doorway. They stood there silent, the Archbishop very dejected, the Lord d’Espahn, with his grey beard, very erect and ruddy featured.</p>
			<p>“Why, God help me,” the King said, “what make of Court is this of mine where a King may not send a messenger to his wife?”</p>
			<p>The Archbishop swallowed in his throat; the Lord d’Espahn did not speak but gazed before him.</p>
			<p>“You shall tell me what befell, for I am ignorant,” the King said; “but first I will tell you what I do know.</p>
			<p>“Why, come out with me into the corridor, wife,” he cried over his shoulder. “For it is not fitting that these lords come into thy apartment. I will walk with them and talk.”</p>
			<p>He took the Archbishop by the elbow and the Lord d’Espahn by the upper arm, and, leaning upon them, propelled them gently before him.</p>
			<p>“Thus it was,” he said; “this cousin of my wife’s was in the King o’ Scots’ good town of Edinboro’. And, being there, he was much upon my conscience⁠—for I would not have a cousin of my wife’s be there in exile, he being one that formerly much fended for her.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>He spoke out his words and repeated these things for his own purposes, the Queen following behind. When they were come to the corridor-end, there he found, as he had thought, a knot of lords and gentlemen, babbling with their ears pricked up.</p>
			<p>“Nay, stay,” he said, “this is a matter that all may hear.”</p>
			<p>There were there the Duke of Norfolk and his son, young Surrey with the vacant mouth, Sir Henry Wriothesley with<span class="pagenum"><a id="page548">548</a></span> the great yellow beard, the Lord Dacre of the North, the old knight Sir N. Rochford, Sir Henry Peel of these parts, with a many of their servants, amongst them Lascelles. Most of them were in scarlet or purple, but many were in black. The Earl of Surrey had the Queen’s favour of a crowned rose in his bonnet, for he was of her party. The gallery opened out there till it was as big as a large room, broad and low-ceiled, and lit with torches in irons at the angles of it. On rainy days the Queen’s maids were here accustomed to play at stool-ball.</p>
			<p>“This is a matter that all may hear,” the King said, “and some shall render account.” He let the Lord d’Espahn and the Archbishop go, so that they faced him. The Queen looked over his shoulder.</p>
			<p>“As thus⁠ ⁠…” he said.</p>
			<p>And he repeated how it had lain upon his conscience and near his heart that the Queen’s good cousin languished in the town of Edinburgh.</p>
			<p>“And how near we came to Edinboro’ those of ye that were with me can make account.”</p>
			<p>And, lying there, he had taken occasion to send a messenger with others that went to the King o’ Scots⁠—to send a messenger with letters unto this T. Culpepper. One letter was to bid him hasten home unto the Queen, and one was a letter that he should bear.</p>
			<p>“For,” said the King, “we thought thus⁠—as ye wist⁠—that the King o’ Scots would come obedient to our summoning and that there we should lie some days awaiting and entertaining him. Thus did I wish to send my Queen swift message of our faring, and I was willing that this, her cousin and mine, should be my postman and messenger. For he should⁠—I bade him⁠—set sail in a swift ship for these coasts and so come quicker than ever a man might by land.”</p>
			<p>He paused to observe the effect of his words, but no lord spoke though some whispered amongst themselves.</p>
			<p>“Now,” he said, “what stood within my letter to the Queen was this, after salutations, that she should reward<span class="pagenum"><a id="page549">549</a></span> this her cousin that in the aforetime had much fended for her when she was a child. For I was aware how, out of a great delicacy and fear of nepotism, such as was shown by certain of the Popes now dead, she raised up none of her relations and blood, nor none that before had aided her when she was a child and poor. But I was willing that this should be otherwise, and they be much helped that before had helped her since now she helpeth me and assuageth my many and fell labours.”</p>
			<p>He paused and went a step back that he might stand beside the Queen, and there, before them all, Katharine was most glad that she had again set on all her jewels and was queen-like. She had composed her features, and gazed before her over their heads, her hands being folded in the lap of her gown.</p>
			<p>“Now,” the King said, “this letter of mine was a little thing⁠—but great maybe, since it bore my will. Yet”⁠—and he made his voice minatory⁠—“in these evil and tickle times well it might have been that that letter held delicate news. Then all my plots had gone to ruin. How came it that some of ye⁠—I know not whom!⁠—thus letted and hindered my messenger?”</p>
			<p>He had raised his voice very high. He stayed it suddenly, and some there shivered.</p>
			<p>He uttered balefully, “Anan!”</p>
			<p>“As Christ is my Saviour,” the Lord d’Espahn said, “I, since I am the Queen’s Marshal, am answerable in this, as well I know. Yet never saw I this man till to-night at supper. He would have my seat then, and I gave it him. Ne let ne hindrance had he of me, but went his way where and when he would.”</p>
			<p>“You did very well,” the King said. “Who else speaks?”</p>
			<p>The Archbishop looked over his shoulder, and with a dry mouth uttered, “Lascelles!”</p>
			<p>Lascelles, deft and blond and gay, shouldered his way through that unwilling crowd, and fell upon his knees.</p>
			<p>“Of this I know something,” he said; “and if any have offended, doubtless it is I, though with good will.”<span class="pagenum"><a id="page550">550</a></span></p>
			<p>“Well, speak!” the King said.</p>
			<p>Lascelles recounted how the Queen, riding out, had seen afar this gentleman lying amid the heather.</p>
			<p>“And if she should not know him who was her cousin, how should we who are servants?” he said. But, having heard that the Queen would have this poor, robbed wayfarer tended and comforted, he, Lascelles, out of the love and loyalty he owed her Grace, had so tended and so comforted him that he had given up to him his own bed and board. But it was not till that day that, Culpepper being washed and apparelled⁠—not till that day a little before supper, had he known him for Culpepper, the Queen’s cousin. So he had gone with him that night to the banquet-hall, and there had served him, and, after, had attended him with some lords and gentles. But, at the last, Culpepper had shaken them off and bidden them leave him.</p>
			<p>“And who were we, what warrants had we, to restrain the Queen’s noble cousin?” he finished. “And, as for letters, I never saw one, though all his apparel, in rags, was in my hands. I think he must have lost this letter amongst the robbers he fell in with. But what I could do, I did for love of the Queen’s Grace, who much hath favoured me.”</p>
			<p>The King studied his words. He looked at the Queen’s face and then at those of the lords before him.</p>
			<p>“Why, this tale hath a better shewing,” he said. “Herein appeareth that none, save the Queen’s door-ward, came ever against this good knight and cousin of mine. And, since this knight was in liquor, and not overwise sensible⁠—as well he might be after supping in moors and deserts⁠—maybe that door-ward had his reasonable reasonings.”</p>
			<p>He paused again, and looking upon the Queen’s face for a sign:</p>
			<p>“If it be thus, it is well,” he said, “I will pardon and assoil you all, if later it shall appear that this is the true truth.”</p>
			<p>Lascelles whispered in the Archbishop’s ear, and Cranmer uttered⁠—</p>
			<p>“The witnesses be here to prove it, if your Highness will.”</p>
			<p>“Why,” the King said, “it is late enough,” and he leered at<span class="pagenum"><a id="page551">551</a></span> Cranmer, for whom he had an affection. He looked again upon the Queen to see how fair she was and how bravely she bore herself, upright and without emotion. “This wife of mine,” he said, “is ever of the pardoning side. If ye had so injured me I had been among ye with fines and amercements. But she, I perceive, will not have it so, and I am too glad to be smiled upon now to cross her will. So, get you gone and sleep well. But, before you go, I will have you listen to some words.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			<p>He cleared his throat, and in his left hand took the Queen’s.</p>
			<p>“Know ye,” he said, “that I am as proud of this my Queen as was ever mother of her first-born child. For lo, even as the Latin poet saith, that, upon bearing a child, many evil women are led to repentance and right paths, so have I, your King, been led towards righteousness by wedding of this lady. For I tell you that, but for certain small hindrances⁠—and mostly this treacherous disloyalty of the King o’ Scots that thus with his craven marrow hath featorously dallied to look upon my face⁠—but for that and other small things there had gone forth this night through the dark to the Bishop of Rome certain tidings that, please God, had made you and me and all this land the gladdest that be in Christendom. And this I tell you, too, that though by this misadventure and fear of the King o’ Scots, these tidings have been delayed, yet is it only for a little space and, full surely, that day cometh. And for this you shall give thanks first to God and then to this royal lady here. For she, before all things, having the love of God in her heart, hath brought about this desired consummation. And this I say, to her greater praise, here in the midmost of you all, that it be noised unto the utmost corners of the world how good a Queen the King hath taken to wife.”</p>
			<p>The Queen had stood very motionless in the bright illuminations and dancings of the torches. But at the news of delay, through the King of Scots, a spasm of pain and concern came into her face. So that, if her features did not<span class="pagenum"><a id="page552">552</a></span> again move they had in them a savour of anguish, her eyebrows drooping, and the corners of her mouth.</p>
			<p>“And now, good-night!” the King pursued with raised tones. “If ever ye slept well since these troublous times began, now ye may sleep well in the drowsy night. For now, in this my reign, are come the shortening years like autumn days. Now I will have such peace in land as cometh to the husbandman. He hath ingarnered his grain; he hath barned his fodder and straw; his sheep are in the byres and in the stalls his oxen. So, sitteth he by his fireside with wife and child, and hath no fear of winter. Such a man am I, your King, who in the years to come shall rest in peace.”</p>
			<p>The lords and gentlemen made their reverences, bows and knees; they swept round in their coloured assembly, and the Queen stood very tall and straight, watching their departure with saddened eyes.</p>
			<p>The King was very gay and caught her by the waist.</p>
			<p>“God help me, it is very late,” he said. “Hearken!”</p>
			<p>From above the corridor there came the drowsy sound of the clock.</p>
			<p>“Thy daughter hath made her submission,” the Queen said. “I had thought this was the gladdest day in my life.”</p>
			<p>“Why, so it is,” he said, “as now day passeth to day.” The clock ceased. “Every day shall be glad,” he said, “and gladder than the rest.”</p>
			<p>At her chamber door he made a bustle. He would have the Queen’s women come to untire her, a leech to see to Culpepper’s recovery. He was willing to drink mulled wine before he slept. He was afraid to talk with his wife of delaying his letter to Rome. That was why he had told the news before her to his lords.</p>
			<p>He fell upon the Lady Rochford that stood, not daring to go, within the Queen’s room. He bade her sit all night by the bedside of T. Culpepper; he reviled her for a craven coward that had discountenanced the Queen. She should pay for it by watching all night, and woe betide her if any had speech with T. Culpepper before the King rose.<span class="pagenum"><a id="page553">553</a></span></p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
