<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>X</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3>VII</h3>
			<p>It was the Queen's habit to go every night, when the business of the day was done, to pray, along with the Lady Mary, in the small chapel that was in the roof of the castle. To vespers she went with all the Court to the big chapel in the courtyard that the King had builded especially for her. But to this little chapel, that was of Edward IV's time, small and round-arched, all stone and dark and bare, she went with the Lady Mary alone. Her ladies and her doorguards they left at the stair foot, on a level with the sleeping rooms of the poorer sort, but up the little stairway they climbed by themselves, in darkness, to pray privately for the conversion of England. For this little place was so small and so forgotten that it had never been desecrated by Privy Seal's men. It had had no vessels worth the taking, and only very old vestments and a few ill-painted pictures on the stone walls that were half hidden in the dust.</p>
			<p>Katharine had found this little place when, on her first day at Pontefract, she had gone a-wandering over the castle with the King. For she was curious to know how men had lived in the old times; to see their rooms and to mark what old things were there still in use. And she had climbed thus high because she was minded to gaze upon<span class="pagenum"><a id="page480">480</a></span> the huge expanse of country and of moors that from the upper leads of the castle was to be seen. But this little chapel had seemed to her to be all the more sacred because it had been undesecrated and forgotten. She thought that you could not find such another in the King's realm at that time; she was very assured that not one was to be found in any house of the King's and hers.</p>
			<p>And, making inquiries, she had found that there was also an old priest there served the chapel, doing it rather secretly for the well-disposed of the castle's own guards. This old man had fled, at the approach of the King's many, into the hidden valleys of that countryside, where still the faith lingered and lingers now. For, so barbarous and remote those north parts were, that a great many people had never heard that the King was married again, and fewer still, or none, knew that he and his wife were well inclined again towards Rome.</p>
			<p>This old priest she had had brought to her. And he was so well loved that along with him came a cluster of weather-battered moorsmen, right with him into her presence. They kneeled down, being clothed with skins, and several of them having bows of a great size, to beg her not to harm this old man, for he was reputed a saint. The Queen could not understand their jargon but, when their suit was interpreted to her by the Lord Dacre of the North, and when she had had a little converse with the old priest, she answered that, so touched was her heart by his simplicity and gentleness, that she would pray the good King, her lord and master, to let this priest be made her confessor whilst there they stayed. And afterwards, if it were convenient, in reward for his faithfulness, he should be made a prior or a bishop in those parts. So the moorsmen, blessing her uncouthly for her fairness and kind words, went back with their furs and bows into their fastnesses. One of them was a great lord of that countryside, and each day he sent into the castle bucks and moor fowl, and once or twice a wolf. His name was Sir John Peel, and Sir John Peel, too, the priest was called.<span class="pagenum"><a id="page481">481</a></span></p>
			<p>So the priest served that little altar, and of a night, when the Queen was minded next day to partake of the host, he heard her confession. On other nights he left them there alone to say their prayers. It was always very dark with the little red light burning before the altar and two tapers that they lit beneath a statue of the Virgin, old and black and ill-carved by antique hands centuries before. And, in that blackness, they knelt, invisible almost, and still in the black gowns that they put on for prayers, beside a low pillar that gloomed out at their sides and vanished up into the darkness of the roof.</p>
			<p>Having done their prayers, sometimes they stayed to converse and to meditate, for there they could be very private. On the night when the letter to Rome was redrafted, the Queen prayed much longer than the Lady Mary, who sat back upon a stool, silently, to await her finishing—for it seemed that the Queen was more zealous for the converting of those realms again to the old faith than was ever the Lady Mary. The tapers burned with a steady, invisible glow in the little side chapel behind the pillar; the altar gleamed duskily before them, and it was so still that through the unglassed windows they could hear, from far below in the black countryside, a tenuous bleating of late-dropped lambs. Katharine Howard's beads clicked and her dress rustled as she came up from her knees.</p>
			<p>'It rests more with thee than with any other in this land,' her voice reverberated amongst the distant shadows. A bat that had been drawn in by the light flittered invisibly near them.</p>
			<p>'Even what?' the Lady Mary asked.</p>
			<p>'Well you know,' the Queen answered; 'and may the God to whom you have prayed, that softened the heart of Paul, soften thine in this hour!'</p>
			<p>The Lady Mary maintained a long silence. The bat flittered, with a leathern rustle, invisible, between their very faces. At last Mary uttered, and her voice was taunting and malicious<span class="pagenum"><a id="page482">482</a></span>—</p>
			<p>'If you will soften my heart much you must beseech me.'</p>
			<p>'Why, I will kneel to you,' the Queen said.</p>
			<p>'Aye, you shall,' Mary answered. 'Tell me what you would have of me.'</p>
			<p>'Well you know!' Katharine said again.</p>
			<p>In the darkness the lady's voice maintained its bitter mirth, as it were the broken laughter of a soul in anguish.</p>
			<p>'I will have you tell me, for it is a shameful tale that will shame you in the telling.'</p>
			<p>The Queen paused to consider of her words.</p>
			<p>'First, you shall be reconciled with, and speak pleasantly with, the King your father and my lord.'</p>
			<p>'And is it not a shameful thing you bid me do, to bid me speak pleasant words to him that slew my mother and called me bastard?'</p>
			<p>The Queen answered that she asked it in the name of Christ, His pitiful sake, and for the good of this suffering land.</p>
			<p>'None the less, Queen, thou askest it in the darkness that thy face may not be seen. And what more askest thou?'</p>
			<p>'That when the Duke of Orleans his ambassadors come asking your hand in marriage, you do show them a pleasant and acquiescent countenance.'</p>
			<p>The sacredness of that dark place kept Mary from laughing aloud.</p>
			<p>'That, too, you dare not ask in the light of day, Queen,' she said. 'Ask on!'</p>
			<p>'That when the Emperor's ambassadors shall ask for your hand you shall profess yourself glad indeed.'</p>
			<p>'Well, here is more shame, that I should be prayed to feign this gladness. I think the angels do laugh that hear you. Ask even more.'</p>
			<p>Katharine said patiently—</p>
			<p>'That, having in reward of these favours, been set again on high, having honours shown you and a Court appointed round you, you shall gladly play the part of a princess royal to these realms, never gibing, nor sneering upon this<span class="pagenum"><a id="page483">483</a></span> King your father, nor calling upon the memory of the wronged Queen your mother.'</p>
			<p>'Queen,' the Lady Mary said, 'I had thought that even in the darkness you had not dared to ask me this.'</p>
			<p>'I will ask it you again,' the Queen said, 'in your room where the light of the candles shines upon my face.'</p>
			<p>'Why, you shall,' the Lady Mary said. 'Let us presently go there.'</p>
			<hr style="width: 45%;"/>
			<p>They went down the dark and winding stair. At the foot the procession of the <i>coucher de la royne</i> awaited them, first being two trumpeters in black and gold, then four pikemen with lanthorns, then the marshal of the Queen's household and five or seven lords, then the Queen's ladies, the Lady Rochford that slept with her, the Lady Cicely Rochford; the Queen's tiring-women, leaving a space between them for the Queen and the Lady Mary to walk in, then four young pages in scarlet and with the Queen's favours in their caps, and then the guard of the Queen's door, and four pikemen with torches whose light, falling from behind, illumined the path for the Queen's steps. The trumpeters blew four shrill blasts and then four with their fists in the trumpet mouths to muffle them. The brazen cries wound down the dark corridors, fathoms and fathoms down, to let men know that the Queen had done her prayers and was going to her bed. This great state was especially devised by the King to do honour to the new Queen that he loved better than any he had had. The purpose of it was to let all men know what she did that she might be the more imitated.</p>
			<p>But the Queen bade them guide her to the Lady Mary's door, and in the doorway she dismissed them all, save only her women and her door guard and pikemen who awaited her without, some on stools and some against the wall, ladies and men alike.</p>
			<p>The Lady Mary looked into the Queen's face very close and laughed at her when they were in the fair room and the light of the candles.<span class="pagenum"><a id="page484">484</a></span></p>
			<p>'Now you shall say your litany over again,' she sneered; 'I will sit me down and listen.' And in her chair at the table, with her face averted, she dug with little stabs into the covering rug the stiletto with which she was wont to mend her pens.</p>
			<p>Standing by her, her face fully lit by the many candles that were upon the mantel, the Queen, dressed all in black and with the tail of her hood falling down behind to her feet, went patiently through the list of her prayers—that the Lady Mary should be reconciled with her father, that she should show at first favour to the ambassadors that sued for her hand for the Duke of Orleans, and afterwards give a glad consent to her marriage with the Prince Philip, the Emperor's son; and then, having been reinstated as a princess of the royal house of England, she should bear herself as such, and no more cry out upon the memory of Katharine of Aragon that had been put away from the King's side.</p>
			<p>The Queen spoke these words with a serious patience and a level voice; but when she came to the end of them she stretched out her hand and her voice grew full.</p>
			<p>'And oh,' she said, her face being set and earnest in entreaty towards the girl's back, 'if you have any love for the green and fertile land that gave birth both to you and to me——'</p>
			<p>'But to me a bastard,' the Lady Mary said.</p>
			<p>'If you would have the dishoused saints to return home to their loved pastures; if you would have the Mother of God and of us all to rejoice again in her dowry; if you would see a great multitude of souls, gentle and simple reconducted again towards Heaven——'</p>
			<p>'Well, well!' the Lady Mary said; 'grovel! grovel! I had thought you would have been shamed thus to crawl upon your belly before me.'</p>
			<p>'I would crawl in the dust,' Katharine said. 'I would kiss the mire from the shoon of the vilest man there is if in that way I might win for the Church of God——'</p>
			<p>'Well, well!' the Lady Mary said.<span class="pagenum"><a id="page485">485</a></span></p>
			<p>'You will not let me finish my speech about our Saviour and His mother,' the Queen said. 'You are afraid I should move you.'</p>
			<p>The Lady Mary turned suddenly round upon her in her chair. Her face was pallid, the skin upon her hollowed temples trembled—</p>
			<p>'Queen,' she called out, 'ye blaspheme when ye say that a few paltry speeches of yours about God and souls will make me fail my mother's memory and the remembrances of the shames I have had.'</p>
			<p>She closed her eyes; she swallowed in her throat and then, starting up, she overset her chair.</p>
			<p>'To save souls!' she said. 'To save a few craven English souls! What are they to me? Let them burn in the eternal fires! Who among them raised a hand or struck a blow for my mother or me? Let them go shivering to hell.'</p>
			<p>'Lady,' the Queen said, 'ye know well how many have gone to the stake over conspiracies for you in this realm.'</p>
			<p>'Then they are dead and wear the martyr's crown,' the Lady Mary said. 'Let the rest that never aided me, nor struck blow for my mother, go rot in their heresies.'</p>
			<p>'But the Church of God!' the Queen said. 'The King's Highness has promised me that upon the hour when you shall swear to do these things he will send the letter that ye wot of to our Father in Rome.'</p>
			<p>The Lady Mary laughed aloud—</p>
			<p>'Here is a fine woman,' she said. 'This is ever the woman's part to gloss over crimes of their men folk. What say you to the death of Lady Salisbury that died by the block a little since?'</p>
			<p>She bent her body and poked her head forward into the Queen's very face. Katharine stood still before her.</p>
			<p>'God knows,' she said. 'I might not stay it. There was much false witness—or some of it true—against her. I pray that the King my Lord may atone for it in the peace that shall come.'</p>
			<p>'The peace that shall come!' the Lady Mary laughed. 'Oh, God, what things we women are when a man rules us.<span class="pagenum"><a id="page486">486</a></span> The peace that shall come? By what means shall it have been brought on?'</p>
			<p>'I will tell you,' she pursued after a moment. 'All this is cogging and lying and feigning and chicaning. And you who are so upright will crawl before me to bring it about. Listen!'</p>
			<p>And she closed her eyes the better to calm herself and to collect her thoughts, for she hated to appear moved.</p>
			<p>'I am to feign a friendship to my father. That is a lie that you ask me to do, for I hate him as he were the devil. And why must I do this? To feign a smooth face to the world that his pride may not be humbled. I am to feign to receive the ambassadors of the Duke of Orleans. That is cogging that you ask of me. For it is not intended that ever I shall wed with a prince of the French house. But I must lead them on and on till the Emperor be affrighted lest your King make alliance with the French. What a foul tale! And you lend it your countenance!'</p>
			<p>'I would well——' Katharine began.</p>
			<p>'Oh, I know, I know,' Mary snickered. 'Ye would well be chaste but that it must needs be other with you. It was the thief's wife said that.</p>
			<p>'Listen again,' she pursued, 'anon there shall come the Emperor's men, and there shall be more cogging and chicaning, and honours shall be given me that I may be bought dear, and petitioning that I should be set in the succession to make them eager. And then, perhaps, it shall all be cried off and a Schmalkaldner prince shall send ambassadors——'</p>
			<p>'No, before God,' Katharine said.</p>
			<p>'Oh, I know my father,' Mary laughed at her. 'You will keep him tied to Rome if you can. But you could not save the venerable Lady of Salisbury, nor you shall not save him from trafficking with Schmalkaldners and Lutherans if it shall serve his monstrous passions and his vanities. And if he do not this yet he will do other villainies. And you will cosset him in them—to save his hoggish dignity<span class="pagenum"><a id="page487">487</a></span> and buttress up his heavy pride. All this you stand there and ask.'</p>
			<p>'In the name of God I ask it,' Katharine said. 'There is no other way.'</p>
			<p>'Well then,' the Lady Mary said, 'you shall ask it many times. I will have you shamed.'</p>
			<p>'Day and night I will ask it,' Katharine said.</p>
			<p>The Lady Mary sniffed.</p>
			<p>'It is very well,' she said. 'You are a proud and virtuous piece. I will humble you. It were nothing to my father to crawl on his belly and humble himself and slaver. He would do it with joy, weeping with a feigned penitence, making huge promises, foaming at the mouth with oaths that he repented, calling me his ever loved child——'</p>
			<p>She stayed and then added—</p>
			<p>'That would cost him nothing. But that you that are his pride, that you should do it who are in yourself proud—that is somewhat to pay oneself with for shamed nights and days despised. If you will have this thing you shall do some praying for it.'</p>
			<p>'Even as Jacob served so will I,' Katharine said.</p>
			<p>'Seven years!' the Lady Mary mocked at her. 'God forbid that I should suffer you for so long. I will get me gone with an Orleans, a Kaiserlik, or a Schmalkaldner leaguer before that. So much comfort I will give you.' She stopped, lifted her head and said, 'One knocks!'</p>
			<p>They said from the door that a gentleman was come from the Archbishop with a letter to the Queen's Grace.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
