<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="chapter-1-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h3>
			<p>There came in the shaven Lascelles and fell upon his knees, holding up the sheets of the letter he had copied.</p>
			<p>The Queen took them from him and laid them upon the great table, being minded later to read them to the Lady Mary, in proof that the King very truly would make his submission to Rome, supposing only that his daughter would make submission to her.</p>
			<p>When she turned, Lascelles was still kneeling before the doorway, his eyes upon the ground.</p>
			<p>“Why, I thank you,” she said. “Gentleman, you may get you gone back to the Archbishop.”</p>
			<p>She was thinking of returning to her duel of patience with the Lady Mary. But looking upon his blond and agreeable features she stayed for a minute.</p>
			<p>“I know your face,” she said. “Where have I seen you?”</p>
			<p>He looked up at her; his eyes were blue and noticeable, because at times of emotion he was so wide-lidded that the whites showed round the pupils of them.</p>
			<p>“Certainly I have seen you,” the Queen said.</p>
			<p>“It is a royal gift,” he said, “the memory of faces. I am the Archbishop’s poor gentleman, Lascelles.”</p>
			<p>The Queen said⁠—</p>
			<p>“Lascelles? Lascelles?” and searched her memory.</p>
			<p>“I have a sister, the spit and twin of me,” he answered; “and her name is Mary.”</p>
			<p>The Queen said⁠—</p>
			<p>“Ah! ah!” and then, “Your sister was my bedfellow in the maid’s room at my grandmother’s.”</p>
			<p>He answered gravely⁠—</p>
			<p>“Even so!”</p>
			<p>And she⁠—</p>
			<p>“Stand up and tell me how your sister fares. I had some kindnesses of her when I was a child. I remember when I had cold feet she would heat a brick in the fire to lay to them, and such tricks. How fares she? Will you not stand up?”</p>
			<p>“Because she fares very ill I will not stand upon my feet,” he answered.</p>
			<p>“Well, you will beg a boon of me,” she said. “If it is for your sister I will do what I may with a good conscience.”</p>
			<p>He answered, remaining kneeling, that he would fain see his sister. But she was very poor, having married an esquire called Hall of these parts, and he was dead, leaving her but one little farm where, too, his old father and mother dwelt.</p>
			<p>“I will pay for her visit here,” she said; “and she shall have lodging.”</p>
			<p>“Safe-conduct she must have too,” he answered; “for none cometh within seven miles of this court without your permit and approval.”</p>
			<p>“Well, I will send horses of my own, and men to safeguard her,” the Queen said. “For, sure, I am beholden to her in many little things. I think she sewed the first round gown that ever I had.”</p>
			<p>He remained kneeling, his eyes still upon the floor.</p>
			<p>“We are your very good servants, my sister and I,” he said. “For she did marry one⁠—that Esquire Hall⁠—that was done to death upon the gallows for the old faith’s sake. And it was I that wrote the English of most of this letter to his Holiness, the Archbishop being ill and keeping his bed.”</p>
			<p>“Well, you have served me very well, it is true,” the Queen answered. “What would you have of me?”</p>
			<p>“Your Highness,” he answered, “I do well love my sister and she me. I would have her given a place here at the Court. I do not ask a great one; not one so high as about your person. For I am sure that you are well attended, and places few there are to spare about you.”</p>
			<p>And then, even as he willed it, she bethought her that Margot Poins was to go to a nunnery. That afternoon she had decided that Mary Trelyon, who was her second maid, should become her first, and others be moved up in a rote.</p>
			<p>“Why,” she said, “it may be that I shall find her an occupation. I will not have it said⁠—nor yet do it⁠—that I have ever recompensed them that did me favours in the old times, for there are a many that have served well in the Court that then I was outside of, and those it is fitting first to reward. Yet, since, as you say you have writ the English of this letter, that is a very great service to the Republic, and if by rewarding her I may recompense thee, I will think how I may come to do it.”</p>
			<p>He stood up upon his feet.</p>
			<p>“It may be,” he said, “that my sister is rustic and unsuited. I have not seen her in many years. Therefore, I will not pray too high a place for her, but only that she and I may be near, the one to the other, upon occasions, and that she be housed and fed and clothed.”</p>
			<p>“Why, that is very well said,” the Queen answered him. “I will bid my men to make inquiries into her demeanour and behaviour in the place where she bides, and if she is well fitted and modest, she shall have a place about me. If she be too rustic she shall have another place. Get you gone, gentleman, and a good night to ye.”</p>
			<p>He bent himself half double, in the then newest courtly way, and still bent, pivoted through the door. The Queen stayed a little while musing.</p>
			<p>“Why,” she said, “when I was a little child I fared very ill, if now I think of it; but then it seemed a little thing.”</p>
			<p>“Y’had best forget it,” the Lady Mary answered.</p>
			<p>“Nay,” the Queen said. “I have known too well what it was to go supperless to my bed to forget it. A great shadowy place⁠—all shadows, where the night airs crept in under the rafters.”</p>
			<p>She was thinking of the maids’ dormitory at her grandmother’s, the old Duchess.</p>
			<p>“I am climbed very high,” she said; “but to think⁠—”</p>
			<p>She was such a poor man’s child and held of only the littlest account, herding with the maids and the servingmen’s children. At eight by the clock her grandmother locked her and all the maids⁠—at times there were but ten, at times as many as a score⁠—into that great dormitory that was, in fact, nothing but one long attic or grange beneath the bare roof. And sometimes the maids told tales or slept soon, and sometimes their gallants, grooms and others, came climbing through the windows with rope ladders. They would bring pasties and wines and lights, and coarsely they would revel.</p>
			<p>“Why,” she said, “I had a gallant myself. He was a musician, but I have forgot his name. Aye, and then there was another, Dearham, I think; but I have heard he is since dead. He may have been my cousin; we were so many in family, I have a little forgot.”</p>
			<p>She stood still, searching her memory, with her eyes distant. The Lady Mary surveyed her face with a curious irony.</p>
			<p>“Why, what a simple Queen you are!” she said. “This is something rustic.”</p>
			<p>The Queen joined her hands together before her, as if she caught at a clue.</p>
			<p>“I do remember me,” she said. “It was a make of a comedy. This Dearham, calling himself my cousin, beat this music musician for calling himself my gallant. Then goes the musicker to my grandam, bidding the old Duchess rise up again one hour after she had sought her bed. So comes my grandam and turns the key in the padlock and looketh in over all the gallimaufrey of lights and pasties and revels.</p>
			<p>“Why,” she continued. “I think I was beaten upon that occasion, but I could not well tell why. And I was put to sleep in another room. And later came my father home from some war. And he was angry that I had consorted so with false minions, and had me away to his own poor house. And there I had Udal for my Magister and evil fare and many beatings. But this Mary Lascelles was my bedfellow.”</p>
			<p>“Why, forget it,” the Lady Mary said again.</p>
			<p>“Other teachers would bid me remember it that I might remain humble,” Katharine answered.</p>
			<p>“Y’are humble enow and to spare,” the Lady Mary said. “And these are not good memories for such a place as this. Y’had best keep this Mary Lascelles at a great distance.”</p>
			<p>Katharine said⁠—</p>
			<p>“No; for I have passed my word.”</p>
			<p>“Then reward her very fully,” the Lady Mary commended, and the Queen answered⁠—</p>
			<p>“No, for that is against my conscience. What have I to fear now that I be Queen?”</p>
			<p>Mary shrugged her squared shoulders.</p>
			<p>“Where is your Latin,” she said, “with its <i xml:lang="la">nulla dies felix</i>⁠—call no day fortunate till it be ended.”</p>
			<p>“I will set another text against that,” she said, “and that from holy sayings⁠—that <i xml:lang="la">justus ab aestimatione non timebit</i>.”</p>
			<p>“Well,” Mary answered, “you will make your bed how you will. But I think you would better have learned of these maids how to steer a course than of your Magister and the Signor Plutarchus.”</p>
			<p>The Queen did not answer her, save by begging her to read the King’s letter to his Holiness.</p>
			<p>“And surely,” she said, “if I had never read in the noble Romans I had never had the trick of tongue to gar the King do so much of what I will.”</p>
			<p>“Why, God help you,” her stepdaughter said. “Pray you may never come to repent it.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
