<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-1" id="chapter-1-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h3>
			<p>There fell upon the castle a deep peace when the King and most of the men were gone. The Queen had the ordering of all things in the castle and of most in the realm. Beneath her she had the Archbishop and some few of the lords of the council who met most days round a long table in the largest hall, and afterwards brought her many papers to sign or to approve. But they were mostly papers of accounts for the castles that were then building, and some few letters from the King’s envoys in foreign courts. Upon the whole, there was little stirring, though the Emperor Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> was then about harrying the Protestant Princes of Almain and Germany. That was good enough news, and though the great castle had well-nigh seven hundred souls, for the most part women, in it, yet it appeared to be empty. High up upon the upper battlements the guards kept a lazy watch. Sometimes the Queen rode a-hawking with her ladies and several lords; when it rained she held readings from the learned writers amongst her ladies, to teach them Latin better. For she had set a fashion of good learning among women that did not for many years die out of the land. In that pursuit she missed the Magister Udal, for the ladies listened to him more willingly than to another. They were reading the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">True History of Lucian</i>, which had been translated into Latin from the Greek about that time.</p>
			<p>What occupied her most was the writing of the King’s letter to the Pope. Down in their cellar the Archbishop and Lascelles wrought many days at this very long piece of writing. But they made it too humble to suit her, for she would not have her lord to crawl, as if in the dust upon his belly, so she told the Archbishop. Henry was to show contrition and repentance, desire for pardon and the promise of amendment. But he was a very great King and had wrought greatly. And, having got the draft of it in the vulgar tongue, she set about herself to turn it into Latin, for she esteemed herself the best Latinist that they had there.</p>
			<p>But in that again she missed the Magister at last, and in the end she sent for him up from his prison to her antechamber where it pleased her to sit. It was a tall, narrow room, with much such a chair and dais as were in the room of the Lady Mary. It gave on to her bedchamber that was larger, and it had little, bright, deep windows in the thick walls. From them there could be seen nothing but the blue sky, it was so high up. Here she sat, most often with the Lady Rochford, upon a little stool writing, with the parchments upon her knee or setting a maid to sew. The King had lately made her a gift of twenty-four satin quilts. Most of her maids sat in her painted gallery, carding and spinning wool, but usually she did not sit with them, since she was of opinion that they spoke more freely and took more pleasure when she was not there. She had brought many maids with her into Yorkshire for this spinning, for she believed that this northern wool was the best that could be had. Margot Poins sat always with these maids to keep them to their tasks, and her brother had been advanced to keep the Queen’s door when she was in her private rooms, being always without the chamber in which she sat.</p>
			<p>When the Magister came to her, she had with her in the little room the Lady Rochford and the Lady Cicely Rochford that had married the old knight when she was Cicely Elliott. Udal had light chains on his wrists and on his ankles, and the Queen sent her guards to await him at her outer door. The Lady Cicely set back her head and laughed at the ceiling.</p>
			<p>“Why, here are the bonds of holy matrimony!” she said to his chains. “I ha’ never seen them so plain before.”</p>
			<p>The Magister had straws on his cloak, and he limped a little, being stiff with the damp of his cell.</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="la">Ave, Regina!</i>” he said. “<i xml:lang="la">Moriturus te saluto!</i>” He sought to kneel, but he could not bend his joints; he smiled with a humorous and rueful countenance at his own plight.</p>
			<p>The Queen said she had brought him there to read the Latin of her letter. He ducked his brown, lean head.</p>
			<p>“<em>Ha</em>,” he said, “<i xml:lang="la">sine cane pastor</i>⁠—without his dog, as Lucretius hath it, the shepherd watches in vain. Wolves⁠—videlicet, errors⁠—shall creep into your marshalled words.”</p>
			<p>Katharine kept to him a cold face and, a little abashed, he muttered under his breath⁠—</p>
			<p>“I ha’ played with many maids, but this is the worst pickle that ever I was in.”</p>
			<p>He took her parchment and read, but, because she was the Queen, he would not say aloud that he found solecisms in her words.</p>
			<p>“Give me,” he said, “your best pen, and let me sit upon a stool!”</p>
			<p>He sat down upon the stool, set the writing on his knee, and groaned with his stiffness. He took up his task, but when those ladies began to talk⁠—the Lady Cicely principally about a hawk that her old knight had training for the Queen, a white sea hawk from Norway⁠—he winced and hissed a little because they disturbed him.</p>
			<p>“Misery!” he said; “I remember the days when no mouse dared creak if I sat to my task in the learned tongues.”</p>
			<p>The Queen then remembered very well how she had been a little girl with the Magister for tutor in her father’s great and bare house. It was after Udal had been turned out of his mastership at Eton. He had been in vile humour in most of those days, and had beaten her very often and fiercely with his bundle of twigs. It was only afterwards that he had called her his best pupil.</p>
			<p>Remembering these things, she dropped her voice and sat still, thinking. Cicely Elliott, who could not keep still, blew a feather into the air and caught it again and again. The old Lady Rochford, her joints swollen with rheumatism, played with her beads in her lap. From time to time she sighed heavily and, whilst the Magister wrote, he sighed after her. Katharine would not send her ladies away, because she would not be alone with him to have him plague her with entreaties. She would not go herself, because it would have been to show him too much honour then, though a few days before she would have gone willingly because his vocation and his knowledge of the learned tongues made him a man that it was right to respect.</p>
			<p>But when she read what he had written for her, his lean, brown face turning eagerly and with a ferreting motion from place to place on the parchment, she was filled with pity and with admiration for the man’s talent. It was as if Seneca were writing to his master, or Pliny to the Emperor Trajan. And, being a very tender woman at bottom⁠—</p>
			<p>“Magister,” she said, “though you have wrought me the greatest grief I think ye could, by so injuring one I like well, yet this is to me so great a service that I will entreat the King to remit some of your pains.”</p>
			<p>He stumbled up from his stool and this time managed to kneel.</p>
			<p>“Oh, Queen,” he said, “<i xml:lang="la">Doctissima fuisti</i>; you were the best pupil that ever I had⁠—” She tried to silence him with a motion of her hand. But he twined his lean hands together with the little chains hanging from them. “I call this to your pitiful mind,” he brought out, “not because I would have you grateful, but to make you mindful of what I suffer⁠—<i xml:lang="la">non quia grata sed ut clemens sis</i>. For, for advancement I have no stomach, since by advancing me you will advance my wife from Paris, and for liberty I have no use since you may never make me free of her. Leave me to rot in my cell, but, if it be but the tractate of Diodorus Siculus, a very dull piece, let me be given some book in a learned tongue. I faint, I starve, I die for lack of good letters. I that no day in my life have passed⁠—<i xml:lang="la">nulla die sine</i>⁠—no day without reading five hours in goodly books since I was six and breeched. Bethink you, you that love learning⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Now tell me,” Cicely Elliott cried out, “which would you rather in your cell⁠—the Letters of Cicero or a kitchen wench?”</p>
			<p>The Queen bade her hold her peace, and to the Magister she uttered⁠—</p>
			<p>“Books I will have sent you, for I think it well that you should be so well employed. And, for your future, I will have you set down in a monastery where there shall be for you much learning and none of my sex. You have done harm enow! Now, get you gone!”</p>
			<p>He sighed that she had grown so stern, and she was glad to be rid of him. But he had not been gone a minute into the other room when there arose such a clamour of harsh voices and shrieks and laughter that she threw her door open, coming to it herself before the other ladies could close their mouths, which had opened in amazement.</p>
			<p>The young Poins was beating the Magister, so that the fur gown made a greyish whirl about his scarlet suit in the midst of a tangle of spun wool; spinning wheels were overset, Margot Poins crashed around upon them, wailing; the girls with their distaffs were crouching against the window-places and in corners, crying out each one of them.</p>
			<p>The Queen had a single little gesture of the hand with which she dismissed all her waiting-women. She stood alone in the inner doorway with the Lady Cicely and the Lady Rochford behind her. The Lady Rochford wrung her gouty hands; the Lady Cicely set back her head and laughed.</p>
			<p>The Queen spoke no word, but in the new silence it was as if the Magister fell out of the boy’s hands. He staggered amidst the trails of wool, nearly fell, and then made stiff zigzags towards the open outer door, where his prison guards awaited him, since they had no warrant to enter the antechamber. He dragged after him a little trail of fragments of spinning wheels and spindles.</p>
			<p>“Well, there’s a fine roister-doister!” the Lady Cicely laughed behind the Queen’s back. The Queen stood very still and frowned. To her the disturbance was monstrous and distasteful, for she was minded to have things very orderly and quiet. The boy, in his scarlet, pulled off his bonnet and panted, but he was not still more than a second, and suddenly he called out to the Queen⁠—</p>
			<p>“Make that pynot to marry my sister!”</p>
			<p>Margot Poins hung round him and cried out⁠—</p>
			<p>“Oh no! Oh no!”</p>
			<p>He shook her roughly loose.</p>
			<p>“An’ you do not wed with him how shall I get advancement?” he said. “ ’A promised me that when ’a should come to be Chancellor ’a would advance me.”</p>
			<p>He pushed her from him again with his elbow when she came near.</p>
			<p>“Y’ve grown over familiar,” the Queen said, “with being too much near me. Y’are grown over familiar. For seven days you shall no longer keep my door.”</p>
			<p>Margot Poins raised her arms over her head, then she leant against a windowpane and sobbed into the crook of her elbow. The boy’s slender face was convulsed with rage; his blue eyes started from his head; his callow hair was crushed up.</p>
			<p>“Shall a man⁠—” he began to protest.</p>
			<p>“I say nothing against that you did beat this Magister,” the Queen said. “Such passions cannot be controlled, and I pass it by.”</p>
			<p>“But will ye not make this man to wed with my sister?” the boy said harshly.</p>
			<p>“I cannot. He hath a wedded wife!”</p>
			<p>He dropped his hands to his side.</p>
			<p>“Alack; then my father’s house is down,” he cried out.</p>
			<p>“Gentleman Guard,” Katharine said, “get you for seven days away from my door. I will have another sentry whilst you bethink you of a worthier way to advancement.”</p>
			<p>He gazed at her stupidly.</p>
			<p>“You will not make this wedding?” he asked.</p>
			<p>“Gentleman Guard,” Katharine said, “you have your answer. Get you gone.”</p>
			<p>A sudden rage came into his eyes; he swallowed in his throat and made a gesture of despair with his hand. The Queen turned back into her room and busied herself with her task, which was the writing into a little vellum book of seven prayers to the Virgin that the Lady Elizabeth, Queen Anne Boleyn’s daughter, a child then in London, was to turn each one into seven languages, written fair in the volume as a gift, against Christmas, for the King.</p>
			<p>“I would not have that boy to guard my door,” the Lady Cicely said to the Queen.</p>
			<p>“Why, ’tis a good boy,” Katharine answered; “and his sister loves me very well.”</p>
			<p>“Get your Highness another,” the Lady Cicely persisted. “I do not like his looks.”</p>
			<p>The Queen gazed up from her writing to where the dark girl, her figure raked very much back in her stiff bodice, played daintily with the tassels of the curtain next the window.</p>
			<p>“My Lady,” Katharine said, “my Highness must get me a new maid in place of Margot Poins, that shall away into a nunnery. Is not that grief enough for poor Margot? Shall she think in truth that she has undone her father’s house?”</p>
			<p>“Then advance the springald to some post away from you,” the Lady Cicely said.</p>
			<p>“Nay,” the Queen answered; “he hath done nothing to merit advancement.”</p>
			<p>She continued, with her head bent down over the writing on her knee, her lips moving a little as, sedulously, she drew large and plain letters with her pen.</p>
			<p>“By Heaven,” the Lady Cicely said, “you have too tickle a conscience to be a Queen of this world and day. In the time of Caesar you might have lived more easily.”</p>
			<p>The Queen looked up at her from her writing; her clear eyes were untroubled.</p>
			<p>“Aye,” she said. “<i xml:lang="la">Lucio Domitio, Appio Claudio consulibus</i>⁠—”</p>
			<p>Cicely Rochford set back her head and laughed at the ceiling.</p>
			<p>“Aye, your Highness is a Roman,” she tittered like a magpie.</p>
			<p>“In the day of Caesar it was simple to do well,” the Queen said.</p>
			<p>“Why, I do not believe it,” Cicely answered her.</p>
			<p>“Cousin! Cousin!” The old Lady Rochford warned her that this was the Queen, not her old playmate.</p>
			<p>“But now,” the Queen said, “with such a coming together and a concourse of peoples about us; with such holes and corners in a great Court⁠—” She paused and sighed.</p>
			<p>“Well, if I may not speak my mind,” Cicely Rochford said to the old lady, “what good am I?”</p>
			<p>“I did even what I might to keep this lamb Margot from the teeth of that wolf Magister,” the Queen said. “I take shame to myself that I did no more. I will do a penance for it. But still I think that these be degenerate days.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, Queen of dreams and fancies,” Cicely Rochford said. “I am very certain that in the days of your noble Romans it was as it is now. Tell me, if you can, that in all your readings of hic and hoc you lit not upon such basenesses? You will not lay your hand upon your heart and say that never a man of Rome bartered his sister for the hope of advancement, or that never a learned doctor was a corrupter of youth? I have seen the like in the plays of Plautus that here have been played at Court.”</p>
			<p>“Why,” the Queen said, “the days of Plautus were days degenerated and fallen already from the ancient nobleness.”</p>
			<p>“You should have Queened it before Goodman Adam fell,” Cicely Rochford mocked her. “If you go back before Plautus, go back all the way.”</p>
			<p>She shrugged her shoulders up to her ears and uttered a little sound like “<em>Pfui!</em>” Then she said quickly⁠—</p>
			<p>“Give me leave to be gone, your Highness, that I may not grow over familiar like the boy with the pikestaff, for if it do not gall you it shall wring the withers of this my old husband’s cousin!”</p>
			<p>The old Lady Rochford, who was always thinking of what had been said two speeches ago, because she was so slow-witted, raised her gouty hands in the air and opened her mouth. But the Queen smiled faintly at Cicely.</p>
			<p>“When I ask you to mince matters in my little room you shall do it. It was Lucius the Praetor that went always accompanied by a carping Stoic to keep him from being puffed up, and it was a good custom.”</p>
			<p>“Before Heaven,” Cicely Rochford said in the midst of her curtsey at the door, “shall I have the office of such a one as Diogenes who derided Alexander the Emperor? Then must my old husband live with me in a tub!”</p>
			<p>“Pray you,” the Queen said after her through the door, “look you around and spy me out a maid to be my tiring-woman and ward my spinsters. For nowadays I see few maids to choose from.”</p>
			<p>When she was gone the old Lady Rochford timorously berated the Queen. She would have her be more distant with knights’ wives and the like. For it was fitting for a Queen to be feared and deemed awful.</p>
			<p>“I had rather be loved and deemed pitiful,” Katharine answered. “For I was once such a one⁠—no more⁠—than she or thou, or very little more. Before the people I bear myself proudly for my lord his high honour. But I do lead a very cloistered life, and have leisure to reflect upon for what a little space authority endureth, and how that friendship and true love between friends are things that bear the weather better.” She did not say her Latin text, for the old lady had no Latin.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
